---
title: "Exploratory analysis of how Bon Iver creates a mode"
date: 2021-06-16
tags: [R, data science, music, SpotifyR, Bon Iver, GeniusR]
header: "images/pca/pcaarticle.jpg"
excerpt: "A look at the quality of Bon Iver's songs using SpotifyR and GeniusR"
author: Robbie Dunne

---

This is a tutorial and exploratory analysis essay of Bon Iver's music using SpotifyR, GeniusR and a number of data visualisation tools in R. You can find the code for the same project in Python here.

---

I remember where I was the first time I heard Bon Iver. I remember the feeling his first album gave me. It was perfect; just what I needed without explicitly knowing that it was what I was looking for me. I have remained close to that first album ever since and even used it as a way to get over a sudden and inexplicable fear of flying I developed a few years ago. I would get a good book and read it as I queued to get on the plane. I would put on For Emma, Forever Ago and just zone out until we were in the sky. The familiarity of the lyrics didn't distract from my reading the book and the atmospheric orchestra of sounds made me feel safe.

Justin Vernon famously went to live in his father's cabin in Wisconsin to record the album and it's both the perfect backstory and the ideal narrative for the album like he emerged with however many months later when he finally walked out of the snow.

Bon Iver's ability to create a mood is what makes me return to him time and time again. As I embarked on this data exploratory analysis, I picked Bon Iver because he intrigues me. I feel like I understand his music without understanding what exactly it is that his music does to me. For example, I listen to dance music when I'm happy or running. I listen to instrumental music when I'm writing something. I can understand what this music does for me but Bon Iver's music doesn't have that same overarching distinction.
